here in the UK three former Supreme
Court justices have joined more than 600
legal experts in calling for the
government to end weapons sales to
Israel one of those former justices is
Lord suion talking to the BBC he
explained why he decided to sign the
letter I was sent a copy of it I thought
that it was a persuasive and moderately
expressed letter which makes some very
important points that the UK government
seems to be losing sight of the most
important point is that article one of
the genocide convention uh requires
States um uh to uh do what they can to
prevent genocide now it hasn't yet been
determined whether what the Israelis are
doing is genocide the icj international
court of justice is considering that
issue but they have already ruled that
there is a plausible case that that is
what is going on uh in Gaza and it seems
to me that if you um have a duty as we
do uh an international law to prevent
genocide uh and there is a plausible
case that that is what is happening you
should do what you can uh to abstract it
well let's speak to our political
correspondent Hannah Miller who's at
Westminster Hannah what has the response
from the ukai Prime Minister and from
the main opposition party leader been at
the moment we've not had any direct
response to that letter from 600
prominent lawyers and academics but
there is clearly a kind of growing
weight of voices behind this call for
the UK to suspend um sales and there's a
handful of conservative MPS now saying
that the deaths of UK Aid workers must
be a line in the sand that's a quote
from Paul Bristo the peterb MP as I say
one of just a handful but adding to that
there's also the former foreign office
Minister sir Alan Duncan
who has said that it can no longer be
justified that we send arms over to
Israel and he previously had
responsibility for looking at who gets
export licenses and where arms can go I
would say though that there are
conservative MPS who believe that the UK
must stand by Israel including the
former Home Secretary sella braan who
visited Israel this week and also Lord
Frost the former brexit negotiator he
said Israel must not just be allowed it
must be enabled to win this war that's
because it's in our national interest to
do so he said so in that sense it's
there's not a kind of United uniform
view within the conservative party but
there is added weight behind those calls
for the UK to suspend armed sales
Labour's position is to ask for the
government to publish its legal advice
on the issue they say that if if that
legal advice shows that Israel hasn't
been meeting its International
obligations then armed sales should be
suspended that is a more nuanced view
than has been taken by the liberal
Democrats and the SNP who have been
calling for some time now for arm sales
to be suspended Hannah thank you that's
our political correspondent Hannah
Miller at Westminster for us well let's
speak now to John devil a former
Brigadier with the British Army and
former director of Defense diplomacy at
the ministry of Defense thank you so
much for for joining is now we heard
there that the deaths of the UK Aid
workers represented for some A Line in
the Sand what was the specific turning
point for you where you believed that it
was no longer okay for the UK to supply
weapons to
Israel well Lu me thanks for having me
on so going back in time I for the best
part of two years was the senior British
officer working in the Palestinian
territories and from that perspective I
got to know the Israeli Defense Forces
very well I was around at the time of
massive incursion by the IDF into Gaza
operation castled so I've seen this
closeup in the past and for me the
Turning Point actually was a long time
ago and the calls about which uh people
have been hearing on your program for
the last 5 10 minutes uh have come late
in the day because it was completely
clear to me looking at the scale of the
casualties on the civilian side that
from a military point of view as a
former military operational planner and
somebody who knows the IDF uh adequate
care in my view was not being taken by
the IDF as of a long time ago in this
campaign in order to minimize civilian
casualties John you were among
signatories saying that the UK should
stop sending arms to Israel uh before
today and last week as well a
cross-party group of MPS said the UK
should stop sending arms to Israel and
now we've heard hundreds of legal
experts saying the same thing but which
authority ultimately makes a judgment on
this and can enforce
it well the um of course there are a
number of reasons which we've been
hearing um in the last 10 minutes as to
why we should be stopping arms uh
exports at the end of the day it's the
British government decision but it's
it's obliged by our government is
obliged both by our own laws and by
International laws not to provide export
licenses if there is a plausible risk
that those weapons will be used in
violation of of international
humanitarian law otherwise known as law
of arm
conflict as far as I understand it Lord
Cameron about a month ago now said that
the lawyers in the foreign office were
going to look at whether or not IHL was
potentially being breached and we still
have to uh learn about the results there
was a leak uh not long ago suggesting
that they had already apped that IHL was
in danger of being breached and the
point being therefore that uh that our
government potentially is out of order
legally we have form in this regard
going back to I think 2017 the British
government found itself in court and
lost lost the case and was was ordered
by the judge to cease weapons exports to
Saudi Arabia because the Royal Saudi Air
Force was using British Munitions and
aircraft uh to bomb over Yemen without
taking du consideration about civilian
culties so we've been there before and I
can I can foresee looks me that we'll be
here again pretty soon if we don't stop
exporting weapons and John just briefly
finally what would the consequences be
then for the UK if that were found to be
the case well I would say a lot of
embarrassment
I would say that uh as I say that we
will have to will be ordered by by a
judge potentially to stop exporting if
we don't preempt that by stopping doing
that before then are soonest I think
also what I would like to see from
military point of view which we
certainly would do ourselves not only
the better coordination that your
respondents have been talking about but
also accountability so in our system we
would uh expect the soldiers and their
chain of command in terms of officers to
be held to account and that's not only
if uh not only for sins of commission
I.E for instance the possibility that
direct targeting took place uh on
purpose in order to um hit the
humanitarian Convoy yesterday but also
sin of omission I lack of adequate care
so I would like to see proper
accountability as well and that's
certainly what we would do I set out a
model process on paper for our
government which went to number 10 and
also chief of Defense staff on our side
after the uh the Saudi example I gave
you earlier uh setting out exactly what
we are El would do in the British
military in order to uh ensure that we
minimize civilian culties and those are
the sorts of things that our own
government should be ensuring that in
this case the Israelis uh carry out and
indeed any other country to whom we
might export weapons in order to avoid
being in beats of law Brigadier John
devil thank you so much for your time